feat: upgrade to v2 (#2180)
biomejs/website: src/content/docs/guides/upgrade-to-biome-v2.mdx

As you can see, the glob `**/src/**` is **too** eager, and it matches paths that shouldn't have, for example  `/Users/www/projectB/frontend/src/file.js`.

From v2, Biome **won't prepend `**/`** to globs anymore.

### The option `all` is removed from the linter

In the very early versions of Biome, we introduced `all` as a mean to enable all rules of the linter, or enable all rules that belong to a group. At that time, Biome had few rules, and their maintenance cost was very low to the maintainers and the end-users. We didn't think twice, and we just added it.

Now Biome has more than 300 rules, and some of those rules *conflict with each other*, causing situations where a project can't fix the violations of the rules, because one fix triggers another rule, and vice versa.

We decided to **take a step back**, remove the option, and introduce it in the future in some other form, maybe with different semantics and configuration. We are aware that this breaking change can cause some inconvenience.

The maintainers of the project are already discussing the topic on Discord and GitHub. You are encouraged to take part in the conversation and help us finding a good solution.

> As *limited* workaround, you can enable the recommended rules, and enable all the linter domains. However, you can't disable single rules.

Author: Ah yeah, thank you for catching it

The maintainers of the project are already discussing the topic on Discord and GitHub. You are encouraged to take part in the conversation and help us find a good solution.

As *limited* workaround, you can enable the recommended rules, and enable all the linter domains. However, you can't disable single rules, and the domains `react` and `solid` enable rules that go in conflict with each other:

```json title="biome.json"
{
  "linter": {
    "domains": {
      "next": "all",
      "react": "all",
      "test": "all",
      "solid": "all",
      "project": "all"
    },
    "rules": {
      "recommended": true
    }
  }
}
```

### Syntax `assert` no longer supported

The `assert` syntax, which reached Stage 3, is no longer supported, and it was replaced by the `with` syntax.

All LTS versions of Node.js support the new syntax, as well as all browser engines and serverless runtimes.

```diff mark="with" mark="assert"
-import {test} from "foo.json" assert { for: "for" }
-export * from "mod" assert { type: "json" }
+import {test} from "foo.json" with { for: "for" }
+export * from "mod" with { type: "json" }
```

> ### Globs are now relative to the configuration file

Reviewer: It could make sense of moving this section closer to the section about `includes`.

Author: True! Where should I move it? Before or after?

Reviewer: After?

---
title: Upgrade to Biome v2
description: Learn how to upgrade to Biome v2
---
import PackageManagerCommand from "@/components/PackageManagerCommand.astro";
import PackageManagerBiomeCommand from "@/components/PackageManagerBiomeCommand.astro";
import EditorSettings from "@/components/EditorSettings.astro";
import {FileTree, Steps} from '@astrojs/starlight/components';

> If you have a project that uses Biome v1, and you want to upgrade to v2, this will guide will provide all the information

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you have a project that uses Biome v1, and you want to upgrade to v2, this guide will provide all the information
```

you need.

## Upgrade via CLI

<Steps>
    <ol>
        <li>

            Use your package manager to install the version `2.0.0` of Biome:
            <PackageManagerCommand
                npm="install --save-dev --save-exact @biomejs/biome@2.0.0"
                pnpm="add --save-dev --save-exact @biomejs/biome@2.0.0"
                yarn="add --dev --exact @biomejs/biome@2.0.0"
                bun="add --dev --exact @biomejs/biome@2.0.0"
                deno="add --dev npm:@biomejs/biome@2.0.0" />
        </li>
        <li>
            Run the `migrate` command to update the configuration:
            <PackageManagerBiomeCommand command="migrate --write" />
        </li>
        <li>

>             You're all set! The `migrate` command should have updated your configuration to *mitigate* possible [breaking changes](#breaking-changes).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            You're all set! The `migrate` command should have updated your configuration to *mitigate* possible [breaking changes](#breaking-changes). Do check the output of the command however; in some cases it’s possible that you need to perform some manual steps. If so, the migrate command will point them out to you.
```

### The option `--config-path` is removed

The CLI option `--config-path` is removed from the commands `biome lsp-proxy` and `biome start`.

The option was overriding the configuration path for all workspaces opened in the Biome daemon, which led to a configuration mismatch problem when multiple projects are opened in some editors or IDEs.

If you use an LSP-compatible editor, you can use its settings to define the configuration path of the project.

<EditorSettings zed={{ name: "configuration_path", value: "\"./frontend/biome.json\""}} vsCode={{ name: "configurationPath", value: "\"./frontend/biome.json\"" }}></EditorSettings>

If you are a developer of a plugin, please update your plugin to use the `workspace/configuration` response instead of using the `--config-path` argument. Biome’s LSP will resolve a configuration in the workspace automatically, so it is recommended to keep it empty unless you are using a custom configuration path.

### The options `ignore` and `include` are removed, and replaced by `includes`

> If you ran the command `migrate` already, you shouldn't have regressions. The reason why these two fields were merged into a  new one  was because the underneath implementation of glob engine was flawed, causing some edge cases that we couldn't fix unless we changed our engine, and introduce breaking changes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you ran the command `migrate` already, you shouldn't have regressions. The reason why these two fields were merged into a single new one was because the implementation of Biome’s old glob engine was flawed, causing some edge cases that we couldn't fix unless we changed our engine. Unfortunately, we couldn’t do this without breaking changes.
```

> The previous glob engine would prepend the matcher `**/`to any user provided glob. Which means that the glob `src/**` was always converted to `**/src/**`, causing some unexpected behavior in some cases:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The previous glob engine would prepend the matcher `**/`to any user-provided glob. Which means that the glob `src/**` was always converted to `**/src/**`, causing some unexpected behavior in some cases:
```

|             | `/projectA/src/file.js`     | `src/file.js`     | `/projectB/frontend/src/file.js` |
|-------------|-----------------------------|-------------------|----------------------------------|

> | `src/**`    | Glob *doesn't* matches path | Glob matches path | Glob *doesn't* matches path      |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `src/**`    | Glob *doesn't* match path | Glob matches path | Glob *doesn't* match path      |
```

| `**/src/**` | Glob matches path           | Glob matches path | Glob matches                     |

As you can see, the glob `**/src/**` is **too** eager, and it matches paths that shouldn't have, for example  `/Users/www/projectB/frontend/src/file.js`.

From v2, Biome **won't prepend `**/`** to globs anymore.

> ### Globs are now relative to the configuration file

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Paths are now relative to the configuration file
```

<FileTree>
    - biome.json
    - src
    - deploy.js
    - ui
    - package.json
    - src
    - main.tsx
    - utils.ts
</FileTree>

```json title="ui/package.json"
{
  "name": "@org/ui",
  "publish": false,
  "scripts": {
    "check": "biome check"
  }
}
```

```json title="biome.json"
{
  "files": {
    "includes": ["src/**"]
  }
}
```

In **v1**, when you run `npm run check`, the following happens:
- Biome looks for `biome.json` inside `ui/`
- No configuration file found, Biome starts checking the parent folders
- Biome finds `biome.json` **in the parent folder**
- The *working directory* is `ui/`, because that's where the CLI commands was ran
- Biome prepend `ui/` to `src/**`
- The glob `ui/src/**` matches `ui/src/main.tsx` and `ui/src/utils.ts`, but it doesn't match `src/deploy.js`
- Two files are analyzed

In **v2**, when you run `npm run check`, the following happens:
- Biome looks for `biome.json` inside `ui/`
- No configuration file found, Biome starts checking the parent folders
- Biome finds `biome.json` **in the parent folder**

> - The glob `src/**` doesn't `ui/src/main.tsx`, `ui/src/utils.ts`, and matches `src/deploy.js`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The glob `src/**` doesn't match `ui/src/main.tsx` and `ui/src/utils.ts`, but matches `src/deploy.js`
```

- One file is analyzed

To match the previous behavior, the glob must be updated to `ui/src/**`:

```json title="biome.json" mark="ui/src/**" ins={3}
{
  "files": {
    "includes": ["ui/src/**"]
  }
}
```

### The option `all` is removed from the linter

In the very early versions of Biome, we introduced `all` as a mean to enable all rules of the linter, or enable all rules that belong to a group. At that time, Biome had few rules, and their maintenance cost was very low to the maintainers and the end-users. We didn't think twice, and we just added it.

Now Biome has more than 300 rules, and some of those rules *conflict with each other*, causing situations where a project can't fix the violations of the rules, because one fix triggers another rule, and vice versa.

We decided to **take a step back**, remove the option, and introduce it in the future in some other form, maybe with different semantics and configuration. We are aware that this breaking change can cause some inconvenience.

> The maintainers of the project are already discussing the topic on Discord and GitHub. You are encouraged to take part in the conversation and help us find a good solution.

Reviewer 2: Maybe add a link to the discussion?

> The maintainers of the project are already discussing the topic on Discord and GitHub. You are encouraged to take part in the conversation and help us find a good solution.

Author: ```suggestion
The maintainers of the project are already discussing the topic on Discord and [GitHub](https://github.com/biomejs/biome/issues/5764). You are encouraged to take part in the conversation and help us find a good solution.
```

> As *limited* workaround, you can enable the recommended rules, and enable all the linter domains. However, you can't disable single rules, and the domains `react` and `solid` enable rules that go in conflict with each other:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As *limited* workaround, you can enable the recommended rules, and enable all the linter domains. However, you can't disable single rules, and the domains `react` and `solid` enable rules that conflict with each other:
```

All LTS versions of Node.js support the new syntax, as well as all browser engines and serverless runtimes.

```diff mark="with" mark="assert"
-import {test} from "foo.json" assert { for: "for" }
-export * from "mod" assert { type: "json" }
+import {test} from "foo.json" with { for: "for" }
+export * from "mod" with { type: "json" }
```

### The linter works differently

In v1, the linter worked as follows:
- The recommended rules, by default, emit only diagnostics with error.
- The non-recommended rules needed to be manually enabled, and the user had to decide the severity.

This way of working was a bit different from other linters (ESLint, clippy, golint, etc.), and it was very limited.

In v2, the linter works like other linters do, which means the following:
- Every rule is associated with a default severity level, suggested by Biome.
- The recommended rules can emit diagnostics of different severity.
- Users can now avail of the default severity of a rule, or choose the severity themselves.

If you relied on recommended rules to always emit an error, the `biome migrate` command will set the severity of those rules to `"error"`.

### `style` rules don't emit errors anymore

> We received a lot of great feedback in the past months regarding our recommended rules. We realized that it's challenging to balance a "recommended" set of rules for our users. While some really our defaults, some others thought that they were too noisy.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We received a lot of great feedback in the past months regarding our recommended rules. We realized that it's challenging to balance a "recommended" set of rules for our users. While some really liked our defaults, others thought that they were too noisy.
```

> From v2, all rules that belong to the `style` group won't emit an error unless configured otherwise. The `biome migrate` command will update the configuration so they still emit errors. Make sure that the configuration conforms your standards.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
From v2, all rules that belong to the `style` group won't emit an error unless configured otherwise. The `biome migrate` command will update the configuration so they still emit errors if you had them enabled. Make sure that the configuration conforms to your standards.
```

### Different default formatting of `package.json`

Biome now formats `package.json` with different defaults. Now objects and arrays are always formatted on multiple lines, regardless of their width:

``` diff title="package.json"
-{ "name": "project", "dependencies": { "foo": "^1.0.0" } }
+{
+ "name": "project",
+ "dependencies": {
+   "foo": "^1.0.0"
+ }
+}
```

If you liked the previous formatting style, you'll have to add an override to the configuration, and use the `"auto"` as value of the `expand` option:

```json title="biome.json" ins={6}
{
  "overrides": [{
    "includes": ["package.json"],
    "json": {
      "formatter": {
        "expand": "auto"
      }
    }
  }]
}
```

### Zed extension `v0.2.0` isn't compatible with v1

The new version of the Zed extension isn't compatible with Biome v1, because `--config-path` isn't supported anymore. The team

> tried to maintain backwards compatibility, unfortunately Zed has very limited debugging capabilities (if not none) for extension authors.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
tried to maintain backwards compatibility, but unfortunately Zed has very limited debugging capabilities for extension authors.
```
